good evening and welcome to the third
and last presidential debate of 2008
sponsored by the commission on
presidential debates i'm bob schieffer
of cbs news the rules tonight are simple
the subject is domestic policy i will
divide the next hour and a half into
nine-minute segments i will ask a
question at the beginning of each
segment each candidate will then have
two minutes to respond and then we'll
have a discussion i'll encourage them to
ask follow-up questions of each other if
they do not i will the audience behind
me has promised to be quiet except at
this moment when we welcome barack obama
and john mccain
gentlemen welcome but now we've heard
all the talking points so let's try to
tell the people tonight some things that
they they haven't heard let's get to it
another very bad day on wall street as
both of you know both of you proposed
new plans this week to address the
economic crisis senator mccain you
proposed a fifty two billion dollar
planned and includes new tax cuts on
capital gains tax breaks for seniors
write-offs for stock losses among other
things senator obama you proposed sixty
billion dollars in tax cuts for middle
income and lower-income people more tax
breaks to create jobs new spending for
public works projects to creek to create
i will ask both of you why is your plan
better than his senator mccain you go
first well i let me say bob thank you
and thanks to hofstra and by the way our
beloved nancy reagan is in the hospital
tonight so our thoughts and prayers are
going with you it's good to see you
senator obama americans are hurting
right now and they're angry they're
hurting and they're angry they're
innocent victims of greed and excess on
wall street and as well as washington dc
and they're angry and they have every
reason to be angry and they want this
country to go in a new direction
and their elements of my proposal that
you just outlined which i won't repeat
but we also have to have a short-term
fix in my view and long-term fixes let
me just talk to you about one of the
short-term fixes the catalyst for this
housing crisis was the fannie and
freddie mae that caused subprime lending
situations that now caused the housing
market in america to collapse i am
convinced that until we reverse this
continued decline in homeownership and
put a floor under it and so that people
have not only the hope and belief they
can stay in their homes and realize the
american dream but that value will come
up now we have allocated seven hundred
and fifty billion dollars let's take 300
of that billion and go in and buy those
home loan mortgages and negotiate with
those people in their homes some 11
million homes or more so that they can
afford to pay the mortgage stay in their
home now i know the criticism of this
well what about the the citizen that
stayed in their homes that that that
paid their mortgage payments it doesn't
help that person in their home if the if
the next-door neighbor's house is
abandoned and so we've got to reverse
this we ought to put the homeowners
first and i am disappointed that
secretary paulson and others have not
made that their first priority all right
xander obama well first of all i want to
thank hofstra university and the people
of new york for hosting us tonight and
it's wonderful to join senator mccain
again and thank you bob i think
everybody understands at this point that
we are experiencing the worst financial
crisis since the great depression and
the financial rescue plan that senator
mccain and i have supported is a
important first step and i pushed for
some core principles making sure the
taxpayers can get their money back if
they're putting money up making sure
that ceos are not enriching themselves
through this process and i think that
it's going to take some time to work
itself out but what we haven't yet seen
is a rescue package for the middle class
because the fundamentals of the economy
were weak even before this latest crisis
so i've proposed four specific things
that i think can help number one let's
focus on jobs i want to end the tax
breaks for companies that are shipping
jobs overseas and provide a tax credit
for every company that's creating a job
right here in america number two let's
help families right away by providing
them a tax cut a middle-class tax cut
for people making less than 200,000 and
let's allow them to access their ira
accounts without penalty if they're
experiencing a crisis now senator mccain
and i agree with your idea that we've
got to help homeowners that's why we
included in the financial package a
proposal to get homeowners
a position where they can renegotiate
their mortgages i disagree with senator
mccain and how to do it because the way
senator mccain has designed his plan
it could be a giveaway to banks if we're
buying full price for mortgages that now
are worth a lot less and we don't want
to waste taxpayer money and we've got to
get the financial package working much
quicker than it's been working last
point i want to make though we've got
some long-term challenges in this
economy that have to be dealt with we've
got to fix our energy policy that is
giving our wealth away we've got to fix
our health care system and we've got to
invest in our education system for every
young person to be able warren
all right would you like to ask him a
question i know i would like to mention
that a couple of days ago senator obama
was out in ohio and he had an encounter
with a guy who's a plumber name is joe
wurtzel berger joe wants to buy the
business that he's been in for all these
years worked 1012 hours a day and he
wanted to buy the business but he looked
at your tax plan and he saw that he was
going to pay much higher taxes you were
going to put him in a higher tax bracket
which was going to increase his taxes
which was going to cause him not to be
able to employ people which joe was
trying to realize the american dream now
senator obama talks about a very very
rich joe i want to tell you i'll not
only help that you buy that business
that you worked your whole life for and
be able and i'll keep your taxes low and
i'll provide available and affordable
health care for you and your employees
and i will not have i will not stand for
a tax increase on small business income
50 of small business income tax is rate
it taxes are paid by small businesses
that 16 million jobs in america and what
you want to do to joe the plumber
and millions more like him is have their
taxes increased and not be able to
realize the american dream of owning
their own business that's what joe
believes he's been watching some ads of
senator mccain's let me tell you what
i'm actually going to do
i think tax policy is a major difference
between senator mccain and i
and we both want to cut taxes the
difference is who we want to cut taxes
for now senator mccain the centerpiece
of his economic proposal is to provide
two hundred billion dollars in
additional tax breaks to some of the
wealthiest corporations in america
exxonmobil another oil companies for
example would get an additional four
billion dollars in tax breaks what i've
said is i want to provide a tax cut for
95 percent of working americans ninety
five percent if you make more if you
make less than a quarter million dollars
a year then you will not see your income
tax go up your capital gains tax go up
your payroll tax not one dime and 95
percent of working families ninety five
percent of you out there will get a tax
cut in fact independent studies have
looked at our prospective plans and have
concluded that i provide three times the
amount of tax relief to middle-class
families then senator mccain does now
the conversation i had with joe the
plumber what i essentially said to him
was five years ago when you weren't in a
position to buy your business you needed
a tax cut ben and what i want to do is
to make sure that the plumber the nurse
the firefighter the teacher the young
entrepreneur who doesn't yet have money
i want to give them a tax break now and
that requires us to make some important
choices last point i'll make about small
businesses not only do 98 of small
businesses make less than 250,000 but i
also want to give them additional tax
breaks because they are the drivers of
the economy they produce the most jobs
you know what senator obama ended up is
conversation with joe the plumber
we need to spread the wealth around in
other words we're going to take joe's
money give it to senator obama and let
him spread the wealth around i want joe
the plumber to spread that wealth around
you told them you want to spread the
wealth around that's the whole premise
behind senator obama's plans our class
warfare let's spread the wealth around
i want small businesses and by the way
the small businesses that we're talking
about that would have receive an
increase in their taxes right now who
why would you want to
anybody's taxes right now why would you
want to do that anyone anyone in america
when we have such a tough time with
these small business people like joe the
plumber are going to create jobs unless
you take that money from him and spread
the wealth around i'm not gonna we're
not gonna do that in my administrator i
can answer the question number one i
want to cut taxes for ninety five
percent of americans now it is true that
my friend and supporter warren buffett
for example could afford to pay a little
more in tax we're talking about given
order in order to give in order to give
additional tax cuts to joe the plumber
before he was at the point where he
could make 250,000 i think exxonmobil
which made 12 billion dollars record
profits over the last several quarters
they can afford to pay a little more so
that ordinary families who are hurting
out there that they're trying to figure
out how they're going to afford food how
they're gonna save for their kids
college education they need a break so
they look nobody likes taxes i would
prefer that none of us had to play taxes
including myself but ultimately we've
got to pay for the core investments that
make this economy strong and somebody
likes taxes let's not raise anybody's
tell a woman the fact is that businesses
in america today are paying second
highest tax rate of anywhere in the
world our tax rates for business in
america is 35 ireland it's 11 percent
where our companies are going to go
where they can create jobs and where
they can do best in business we need to
cut the business tax rate in america we
need to encourage business now
of all times in america we need to cut
people's taxes we need to encourage
business create jobs not spread the
wealth around all right let's go to
another topic it's related so if you
have other things you want to say you
can get back to that this question goes
to you first senator obama we found out
yesterday that this year's deficit will
reach an astounding record high 455
billion dollars some expert
say it could go to a trillion dollars
next year both of you have said you want
to reduce the deficit but the
nonpartisan committee for a responsible
federal budget ran the numbers on both
of your proposals and they say the cost
of your proposals even with the savings
you claim can be made each will add more
than 200 million dollars to the deficit
aren't you both ignoring reality won't
some of the programs you are proposing
have to be trimmed postponed even
eliminated give us some specifics on
what you're going to cut back senator
obama well first of all i think it's
important for the american public to
understand that the 750 billion dollar
rescue package if it's structured
properly and as president i will make
sure it's structured properly means that
ultimately taxpayers get their money
back and that's important to understand
but there is no doubt that we've been
living beyond our means and we're gonna
have to make some adjustments now what
i've done throughout this campaign is to
propose a net spending cut i haven't
made a promise about cut some of these
programs sure absolutely so let me get
to that what i want to emphasize though
is that i have been a strong proponent
of pay-as-you-go every dollar that i've
proposed i've proposed an additional cut
so that it matches and some of the cuts
just to give you an example we spend 15
billion dollars a year on subsidies to
insurance companies it doesn't under the
medicare plan it doesn't help seniors
get any better it's not improving our
health care system it's just a giveaway
we need to eliminate a whole host of
programs that don't work and i want to
go through the federal budget
line-by-line page by page programs that
don't work we should cut programs that
we need we should make them work better
now what is true is that senator mccain
and i have a difference in terms of the
need to invest in america and the
american people i mentioned health care
earlier if we make investments now so
that people have coverage that we are
preventing diseases that will save on
medicare and medicaid in the future if
invest in a serious energy policy that
will save in the amount of money were
borrowing from china to send to saudi
arabia if we invest now in our young
people and their ability to go to
college that will allow them to drive
this economy into the 21st century but
what is absolutely true is that once we
get through this economic crisis and
some of the specific proposals to get us
out of this slump there were not going
to be able to go back to our profligate
ways and we're gonna have to embrace a
culture and an ethic of responsibility
all of us corporations the federal
government and individuals out there who
may be living the other things senator
well thank you bob i just want to get
back to this home ownership
during the depression era we had a thing
called the homeownership loan
corporation and they went out and bought
up these mortgages and people were able
to stay in their homes and eventually
the values of those homes went up and he
actually made money and by the way this
was a proposal made by senator clinton
not too long ago so obviously if we can
start increasing home values then there
will be creation of wealth okay so what
are you i'm well first a second law
energy independent we have to have
nuclear power we have to stop sending
700 billion dollars a year to countries
that don't like us very much it's a win
tied solar natural gas nuclear offshore
drilling which senator obama has opposed
and the point is that we become energy
independent and we will create millions
of jobs millions of jobs in america okay
what would i cut i would have first of
all across-the-board spending freeze
okay that some people say that's a
that's a hatchet and then i would get
out of scalpel okay because we've got we
have presided over the largest increase
we got to have new direction for this
country we have presided over the
largest increase in government since the
great society a government spending has
gone completely out of control ten
trillion dollar debt were given to our
kids a half a trillion dollars will
china i know how to save billions of
dollars in defense spending i know how
to eliminate programs i have fought
against well one of them wouldn't be a
marketing assistance program another one
would be
a number of subsidies for ethanol i
oppose subsidies for ethanol because i
thought it distorted the market and
created inflation
senator obama supported those subsidies
i would eliminate the tariffs on
imported sugarcane based ethanol from
brazil i know how to save billions
i saved the taxpayer six point eight
billion dollars by fighting a deal for a
couple of years as you might recall
there was a sweetheart deal between an
aircraft manufacturer dod and people
ended up in jail
but i would fight for a line-item veto
and i would certainly veto every earmark
pork barrel bill senator obama has asked
for oh nearly 1 billion dollars in pork
barrel earmark projects including 3
million dollars for an overhead
projector in a planetarium in his
hometown that's not the way we cut we'll
cut out all that pork time so well i
think that we do have a disagreement
about across-the-board spending freeze
it sounds good
it's proposed periodically it doesn't
happen and in fact an across-the-board
spending freeze is a hatchet and we do
need a scalpel because there's some
programs that don't work at all there's
some programs that are underfunded and i
want to make sure that we are focused on
those programs that work and now senator
mccain talks a lot about earmarks that's
one of the centerpieces of his campaign
earmarks account for 1/2 of 1 of the
total federal budget there's no doubt
that the system needs reform and there
are a lot of screwy things that we end
up spending money on and they need to be
but it's not going to solve the problem
now the last thing i think we have to
focus on is a little bit of history just
so that we understand what we're doing
going forward when president bush came
into office we had a budget surplus and
the national debt was little over five
trillion dollars it has doubled over the
last eight years and we are now looking
at a deficit of well over half a
trillion dollars so one of the things
that i think we have to recognize is
pursuing the same kinds of policies that
we pursued over the last eight years is
not going to bring down the deficit and
frankly senator mccain
at four four out of five of president
bush's budgets we've got to take this in
a new direction that's what i propose is
probably do either of you think you can
balance a budget in four years you have
said previously you thought you could
senator mccain sure i do
you let me tell you that yeah sin obama
i am not president bush if you wanted to
run against president bush you should
have run four years ago i'm going to
give a new direction to this economy in
this country
senator obama talks about voting for
budgets he voted twice for a budget
resolution that increases the taxes on
individuals making forty two thousand
dollars a year of course we can take a
hatchet and a scalpel to this budget
it's completely out of control the mayor
of new york mayor bloomberg just imposed
across-the-board spending freeze on new
york city they're doing it all over
america because they have to because
they have to balance their budgets
i will balance our budgets and i will
get them and i will reduce this i can we
can do it with this kind of job creation
of energy independence now look
americans are hurting tonight and are
angry and i understand that and they
want a new direction i can bring them in
in that direction by eliminating
spending senator obama talks about the
budgets i voted for he voted for the
last two budgets that had twenty four
billion dollars more in spending than
the button in the budget that the bush
administration proposed he voted for the
energy bill that was full of goodies for
the oil companies that i opposed so the
fact is let's look at our records
senator obama let's look at his graded
by the national taxpayers union and the
citizens against government waste and
the other watchdog organizations i have
fought against spending i have fought
against special interests i have fought
for reform you have to tell me one time
when you have stood up with the leaders
of your party on one single major issue
well the there's a lot of stuff that was
put out there so let me try to address
it first of all in terms of standing up
to the leaders of my party the first
major bill that i voted on in the senate
was in support of tort reform which
wasn't very popular with trial lawyers a
major constituency in the democratic
party i
and overwhelming vote i support charter
schools and
pay-for-performance for teachers doesn't
make me popular with the teachers union
i support clean coal technology doesn't
make me popular with environmentalists
so i've got a history of reaching across
the aisle now with respect to a couple
of things senator mccain said the notion
that i voted for a tax increase for
people making 42,000 a year has been
disputed by everybody who's looked at
this claim that senator mccain keeps on
making even foxnews disputes and and and
that doesn't happen very often when it
comes to accusations about me
it has so the the fact of the matter is
is that if i occasionally mistaken your
policies for george bush's policies it's
because on the core economic issues that
matter to the american people on tax
policy on energy policy on spending
priorities you have been a vigorous
supporter of president bush now you've
shown independence commendable
independence on some key issues like
torture for example and and i give you
enormous credit for that but when it
comes to economic policies essentially
what you are proposing is eight more
years of the same thing and it hasn't
worked and i think the american people
understand it hasn't worked we need to
move in a new direction alright i mean
let me just say okay but it's very clear
that i have disagreed with the bush
administration i have disagreed with
leaders of my own party i got the scars
to prove it whether it be bringing
climate change to the floor of the
senate for the first time whether it be
opposition to spending in earmarks
whether it be the issue of torture
whether it be the conduct of the war in
iraq which i vigorously oppose whether
it be on fighting the pharmaceutical
companies on medicare prescription drugs
importation whether it be fighting for
an hmo patients bill of rights whether
it be the establishment of the 9/11
commission i have a long record of
reform and fighting through on the floor
of the united states senate all right
senator obama your your your argument
for standing up to the
your party isn't very convincing all
right we're gonna move to a another
question and the topic is leadership in
this campaign both of you pledged to
take the high road in this campaign yet
it is turned very nasty
senator obama your campaign is used
words like a rabbit out of touch lie
angry losing his bearings to describe
senator mccain senator mccain your
commercials have included words like
disrespectful dangerous dishonorable he
your running mate said he piled around
with terrorists or each of you tonight
willing to sit at this table and say to
each others face what your campaigns and
the people in your campaigns have said
about each other and the senator mccain
your purse well as this has been a tough
campaign it's been a very tough campaign
and i know from my experience in many
campaigns but if senator obama had asked
responded to my urgent request to sit
down and do town hall meetings and come
before the american people we could have
done at least 10 of them by now when
senator obama was first asked he said
any place any time the way barry
goldwater and jack kennedy agreed to do
before the intervention of the tragedy
of dallas so i think the tone of this
campaign could have been very different
and the fact is it's gotten pretty tough
and i regret some of the negative
aspects of both campaigns but the fact
is that it has taken many turns which i
think are unacceptable one of them
happened just the other day when a man i
admire and respect i've written about
congressman john lewis an american hero
made allegations that sarah palin and i
were somehow associated with the worst
chapter in american history segregation
deaths of children and church bombings
george wallace that that to me was so
hurtful and said obama you didn't
repudiate those remarks every time
there's been an out-of-bounds remark
made by a republican no matter where
they are
i have repudiated them i hope that
senator obama will repudiate those whom
that were made by congressman john lewis
very unfair and totally inappropriate so
i want to tell you we will run a
truthful campaign this is a tough
campaign and it's a matter of fact that
senator obama has spent more money on
negative ads than any political campaign
in history and i can prove it and
senator obama when he said and he signed
a piece of paper that said he would take
public financing for his campaign if i
did that was back when he was a longshot
candidate he didn't keep your word
and we looked into the camera and debate
with senator clinton and said i will sit
down and negotiate with john mccain
about public financing before i make a
decision he didn't tell the american
people the truth because you didn't and
that's that's that's an unfortunate part
now we have a highest spending by
senator obama's campaign than any time
since watergate all right well you know
i think that we expect presidential
campaigns to be tough i think that if
you look at the record and the
impressions of the american people bob
your network just did a poll showing
that two-thirds of the american people
think that senator mccain is running a
negative campaign versus one third of
mine and a hundred percent john of your
ads a hundred percent of them have been
negative funded it absolutely is true
and and now i think the american people
are less interested in our hurt feelings
during the course of the campaign than
addressing the issues that matter to
them so deeply and there is nothing
wrong with us having a vigorous debate
like we're having tonight about health
care about energy policy about tax
policy that's the stuff that campaigns
should be made of the notion though that
because we're not doing town hall
meetings that justifies some of the ads
that have been going up not just from
your own campaign directly john but 527s
and other organizations that make some
pretty tough accusations well i don't
mind being attacked
the next three weeks what the american
people can't afford those is four more
years of failed economic policies and
what they deserve
over the next four weeks is that we talk
about what's most pressing to them the
economic crisis senator mccain's own
campaign said publicly last week that if
we keep on talking about the economic
crisis we lose so we need to change the
subject and i would love to see the next
three weeks devoted to talking about the
economy devoted talking about health
care voter talking about energy and
figuring out how the american people can
send their kids to college and that is
something that i would welcome but it it
requires i think a recognition that
politics as usual has been practiced
over the last several years is not
solving the big problems here in america
well if you'll turn on the television as
i watched the arizona cardinals defeat
the dallas cowboys on sunday every other
ad every other ad was an attack ad on my
health care plan and any objective
observer is said it's not true you're
running ads right now that say that i
oppose federal funding for stem cell
i don't you're running ads that that
miss portray completely my position on
immigration so the fact is that senator
obama is spending unprecedented
unprecedented in the history of american
politics going back to the beginning
amounts of money in negative attack ads
on me and of course i've been talking
about it the economy of course i've
talked to people like joe the plumber
and tell him that i'm not going to
spread his wealth around i'm gonna let
him keep his wealth and of course we're
talking about a positive plan of action
to restore this economy and restore jobs
in america that's what my campaign is
all about and that's what it'll continue
to be all about but again i did not hear
a repudiation of congressman well as i
mean if we want to talk about
congressman lewis who is an american
hero he unprompted by my campaign
without my campaigns awareness
made a statement that he was troubled
with what he was hearing at some of the
rallies that your running mate was
holding in which all the republic
reports indicated were shouting when my
name came up
things like terrorist and kill him and
that your running mate didn't mention
didn't stop didn't say hold on a second
that's kind of out of line and i think
congressman's louis's point was that we
have to be careful about how we deal
with our supporters now that only dummy
son wouldn't at a rate let me complete
my response i do think that he
inappropriately drew a comparison
between what was happening there and
what had happened during the civil
rights movement and we immediately put
out a statement saying that we don't
think that comparison is appropriate and
in fact afterwards congressman lewis put
up a similar statement saying that he'd
probably gone over the line the
important point here is though the
american people have become so cynical
about our politics because all they see
is a tip for 10:00 and back and forth
and what they want is the ability to
just focus on some really big challenges
that we face right now and that's what i
have been trying to focus on this entire
campaign i can have serious differences
about our health care policy for example
john because we do have a difference on
health care policy you know and i hope a
talk line talking about it this evening
but when people suggest that i pal
around with terrorists then we're not
talking about it what we're talking
about let me just say i would let me
just say categorically i'm proud of the
people that come to our rallies whenever
you get a large reality of 10 15 20
thousand people you're going to have for
some french people's you know you know
that and and i and i we've always said
that that's not appropriate but to
somehow say that group of young women
who said military wives from mccain or
somehow saying anything derogatory about
you but or anything
and those veterans have wear those hats
that say world war two vietnam korea
iraq that i'm not going to stand for
people saying that the people come that
come to my rallies or anything but the
most dedicated patriotic men and women
that that are in this nation and and
they're great citizens and i'm not going
to stand for somebody saying that
because someone yelled something at a
rally there's a lot of things have been
yelled at your rallies senator obama
that i'm not happy about either in fact
some t-shirts that are buried under so
the point is the point is that i have
repudiated every time someone's been out
of line whether they've been part of my
campaign or not and i will continue to
do that but what the fact is that we
need to absolutely not stand for the
kind of things that have been going on i
haven't well look as i seen do you take
issue with that you know here's what i
would say i mean we can have a debate
back and forth about the merits of each
other's campaigns i suspect we won't
agree here tonight
what i think is most important is that
we recognize that to solve the key
problems that we're facing if we're
going to solve two wars the worst
financial crisis since the great
depression if we can if we're going to
focus on lifting wages that have
declined over the last eight years and
create jobs here in america then
democrats independents and republicans
we're going to have to be able to work
together and what is important is making
sure that we disagree without being
disagreeable and it means that we can
have tough vigorous debates around
issues what we can't do i think is try
to characterize each other as bad people
and that has been a culture in
washington but that's been taking place
for too long and i think about you asked
me a direct shot in russia oh yeah okay
mr aris i don't care about an old
washed-up terrorist but as senator
clinton said and heard the base with you
we need to know the full extent of that
relationship we need to know the full
extent of senator obama's relationship
with a
corne who is now on the verge of maybe
perpetrating one of the greatest frauds
in voter history in this country may be
destroying fabric of democracy same
front outfit organization that your
campaign gave eight hundred and thirty
two thousand dollars for for quote
lighting and site selection so all of
these things need to be examined of
course i'm gonna botch english i think
it's going to extend this it's just it's
going to be important to just i'll
respond to these two particular
allegations that senator mccain's made
that have gotten a lot of attention in
fact mr ayers has become the
centerpiece of senator mccain's campaign
over the last two or three weeks this
has been their primary focus so let's
get the record straight bill ayers is a
professor of education in chicago forty
years ago when i was eight years old he
engaged in despicable acts with a
radical domestic group i have roundly
condemned those acts 10 years ago he
served and i served on a school reform
board that was funded by one of ronald
reagan's former ambassadors and close
friends mister annenberg other members
on that board were the presidents of the
university of illinois the president
northwestern university who happens to
be a republican the president of the
chicago tribune a republican leaning
newspaper mr ayers is not involved in
my campaign
he has never been involved in this
campaign and he will not advise me in
the white house so that's mr ayers now
with respect to acorn acorn is a
community organization apparently what
they've done is they were paying people
to go out and register folks and
apparently some of the people who were
out there didn't really register people
they just filled out a bunch of names
had nothing to do with us we were not
involved the only involvement i've had
with acorn was i represented them
alongside the us justice department in
making illinois implement a motor voter
law that helped people get registered at
dmvs now the reason i think that it's
important to just get these facts out is
because the allegation that senator
mccain's continually made is that
somehow my associations are troubling
let me tell you who i associate with on
economic policy i associate with warren
buffett and former fed chairman paul
volcker if i'm interested in figuring
out my foreign policy i associate myself
with my running mate joe biden or with
dick lugar the republican ranking member
on the senate foreign relations
committee or general jim jones the
former supreme allied commander of nato
those are the people democrats and
republicans who have shaped my ideas and
who will be surrounding me in the white
house and i think the fact that this has
become such a important part of your
campaign senator mccain says more about
your campaign than it says about me well
again while you were on the board of the
woods foundation you and mr ayers
together you sent two hundred and thirty
thousand dollars to acorn so and you
launched your political campaign in mr
ayers living that's absolutely and and
the facts are facts and records are
relevant and it's not the fact it's not
the fact that senator obama choose to
associate with a guy when 2001 said that
he wished he to bob moore and he had a
long association with him it's the fact
that all the all of the details need to
be known about senator obama's
relationship with them and with acorn
and the american people will make a
judgement and my campaign is about
getting this economy back on track about
creating jobs about a brighter future
for america and that's what my campaign
is about and i'm not going to raise
taxes the way senator obama wants to
raise taxes in a tough economy and
that's really what this this campaigns
are going to be about all right let's go
to the next topic and you we may want to
get back into some of this during this
next discussion i want to ask both of
you about the people that you're going
to bring into the government and our
best insight yet is who you picked as
your running mate so i'll begin by
asking both of you this question and
i'll ask you to answer first senator
why would the country be better off if
your running mate became president
rather than his running mate
well joe biden i think is one of the
finest public servants that has served
in this country it's not just that he
has some of the best foreign policy
credentials of anybody and democrats and
republicans alike
i think acknowledge his expertise there
but it's also that his entire life he
has never forgotten where he came from
coming from scranton fighting on behalf
of working families
remembering what it's like to see his
father lose his job and and go through a
downward spiral economically and as a
consequence his consistent pattern
throughout his career is to fight for
the little guy that's what he's done
when it comes to economic policies that
will help working families get a leg up
that's what he's done when it comes to
for example passing the landmark 1994
crime bill the violence against women's
act joe has always made sure that he is
fighting on behalf of working families
and i think he shares my core values and
my sense of where the country needs to
go because after eight years of failed
policies he and i both agree that what
we're gonna have to do is to
reprioritize make sure that we're
investing in the american people give
tax cuts not to the wealthiest
corporations but give them to small
businesses and give them to individuals
who are struggling right now make sure
that we finally get serious about energy
independence something that has been
languishing in washington for 30 years
and make sure that our kids get a great
education and can afford to go to
college so on the key issues that are of
importance to american families joe
biden's are always been on the right
side and i think he will make an
outstanding president if heaven forbid
something happened to me senator well
americans have gotten to know sarah
palin they know that she
is a role model to women and other
reformers all over america
she's a reformer she is she took on a
governor who was a member of her own
party when she ran for governor when she
was a head of their energy and natural
resources board she saw corruption she
resigned she said and said this can't go
on she's given money back to the
taxpayers she's cut the size of
government she negotiated with the oil
companies have faced them down a 40
billion dollar pipeline of natural gas
it's going to relieve the energy needs
of the united what they call the lower
she's a reformer through and through and
it's time we had that brush of breath of
fresh air coming into our nation's
capital and sweep out the old boy
network in the cronyism that's been so
much a part of it that i've fought
against for all these years she'll be my
partner she understands reform and by
the way she also understands special
needs families she understands that
autism is on the rise we got to find out
what's causing it and we've got to reach
out to these families and help them and
give them the help they need as they
raise these very special needs children
she understands that better than almost
any american that i know i'm proud of
her and that she is ignited our party
and people all over america that have
never been involved in the political
process and i can't tell you how proud i
am of her and her family her husband's a
pretty tough guy by the way do you
think she's qualified to be president
you know i think it's that's gonna be up
to the american people i think that
obviously she's a capable politician
who's has i think excited the basin in
the republican party and i think it's
very commendable the work she's done and
on behalf of special needs i agree with
that john i do want to just point out
that autism for example or other special
needs will require some additional
funding if we're going to get serious in
terms of research that is something that
every family that advocates on behalf of
disabled children
and if we have a across-the-board
spending freeze we're not going to be
able to do it that's an example of i
think the kind of use of the scalpel
that we want to make sure that we're
funding some of those programs do you
think senator biden is qualified well i
think that joe biden is qualified in
many respects but i do point out that
he's been wrong on many foreign policy
and national security issues which is
supposed to be a strength he voted
against the first gulf war he voted
against it and obviously we had to take
padma st out of kuwait or it would have
threatened the middle eastern world
supply in iraq he had this cockamamie
idea about dividing rack iraq into three
countries we're seeing iraq united as
iraqis tough hard but we're seeing them
we're now about to have an agreement for
status of forces in iraq coming up there
are several issues in which frankly joe
biden and i openly and honestly
disagreed on national security policy
and he's been wrong on a number of the
major ones but again i want to come back
to you know notice every time senator
obama says we need to spend more we need
to spend more that's the answer why do
we always have to spend more why can't
we have transparency accountability
reform of these agencies of government
maybe that's why he's asked for 860 shot
and proposed 860 billion dollars worth
of new spending and and wants to raise
people's taxes in a time of incredible
challenge and difficulty and heartache
for the american let's go to let's go to
a new topic you know we're running a
little behind let's talk about energy
and climate control every president
since nixon has said what both of you
said climate change yes he has said what
both of you have said and that is we
must reduce our dependence on foreign
when nixon said if we imported from 17
to 34 percent of our foreign oil
now we're importing more than 60 would
each of you give us a number a specific
number of how much you believe we can
reduce our foreign oil imports during
your four
term and i believe the first question
goes to senator mccain but i believe we
can in for all intents and purposes
eliminate our dependence on middle
eastern oil and venezuelan oil canadian
oil is fine
by the way when senator obama said he
would unilaterally renegotiate the north
american free trade agreement the
canadians said yeah and we'll sell our
oil to china you don't tell countries
you're going to unilaterally renegotiate
agreements with them we can eliminate
our dependence on foreign oil by
building 45 new nuclear power plants
right away we can store and we can
reprocess senator obama will tell you in
the as the extreme environmental is it
has to be safe but we've sailed navy
ships around the world for 60 years with
nuclear power plants on them we can
store and reprocess a nuclear spent
nuclear fuel senator obama no problem so
the point is with nuclear power with a
win tied solar natural gas with
development of flex-fuel hybrid clean
coal technology clean coal technology is
a key in the heartland of america that's
hurting rather badly so i think we can
easily within seven eight ten years if
we put our minds to it we can eliminate
our dependence on the places in the
world that harm our national security if
we don't achieve our independence all
right can we reduce our dependence on
foreign oil and by how much in the first
term you're paying for years i i think
that in ten years we can reduce our
dependence so that we no longer have to
import oil from the middle east or
venezuela i think that's about a
realistic time frame and and this is the
most important issue that our future
economy is gonna face obviously we've
got an immediate crisis right now but
nothing's more important than us no
longer borrowing 700 billion dollars or
more from china and sending it to saudi
it's mortgaging our children's future
now from the start of this campaign i've
identified this as one of my top
priorities and here's what i think we
have to do number one we do need
and domestic production and that means
for example telling the oil companies
the sixty-eight million acres that they
currently have leased that they're not
drilling use them or lose and i think
that we should look at offshore drilling
and implement it in a way that allows us
to get some additional oil but
understand we only have three to four
percent of the world's oil reserves and
we use 25 percent of the world's oil
which means that we can't drill our way
out of the problem that's why i focused
on putting resources into solar wind
biodiesel geothermal these have been
priorities of mine since i got to the
senate and it is absolutely critical
that we develop a high fuel-efficient
car that's built not in japan and not in
south korea but built here in the united
states of america we we invented the
auto industry and the fact that we have
fallen so far behind is something that
we have to work on now i just want to
make one last point because senator
mccain mentioned nafta and the issue of
trade and that actually bears on this
issue i believe in free trade but i also
believe that for far too long
certainly during the course of the bush
administration with the support of
senator mccain the attitudes been that
any trade agreement is a good trade
agreement and nafta doesn't had did not
have enforceable labor agreements and
environmental agreements and what i said
was we should include those and make
them enforceable in the same way that we
should enforce rules against china
manipulating its currency to make our
exports more expensive and their exports
to us cheaper and when it comes to south
korea we've got a trade agreement up
right now they are sending hundreds of
thousands of south korean cars into the
united states that's all good we can
only get four to five thousand into
south korea that is not free trade we've
got to have a president who's going to
be advocating on behalf of american
businesses and american workers and i
make no apology for that senator well
you know i admire so much senator
obama's eloquence and you really have to
pay attention to words he said we will
look at offshore drilling you get that
look at we can offshore drill now we've
got to do it now we will reduce the cost
of a barrel of oil because we show the
world that we have a supply of our own
it's doable the technology is there and
we have to drill now now on the subject
of free trade agreements i am a free
trader and i need we need to have
education and training programs for
displaced workers that work going to our
community colleges but let me give you
another example of free trade agreement
that senator obama opposes right now
because of previous agreements some made
by president clinton the goods that and
products that we send to colombia which
is our largest agricultural importer of
our products it's a hundred there's a
billion dollars that we our businesses
have paid so far in order to get our
goods in there because of previous
agreements their goods and products come
into our country for free so senator
obama who has never traveled south of
our border opposes the colombia free
trade agreement the same country that's
helping us try to stop the flow of drugs
into our country that's killing young
americans and also the country that just
freed three americans that that will
help us create jobs in america because
they will be a market for our goods and
products without have to pay them
without us having to pay the billions of
dollar the billion dollars and more that
we've already played free-trade with
colombia is something that's a
no-brainer but maybe you ought to travel
down there and visit them and maybe you
could understand it a lot better let me
respond actually i understand it pretty
well the history in colombia right now
is that labor leaders have been targeted
for assassination on a fairly consistent
basis and there have not been
prosecutions and what i have said
because the free trade the trade
agreement itself does have labor and
environmental protections but we have to
stand for human rights and we have to
make sure that violence isn't being
perpetrated against workers who are just
trying to organize for their rights
which is why for example i supported the
peruvian free trade agreement which
was a well-structured agreement but i
think that the important point is we've
got to have a president who understands
the benefits of free trade but also is
going to enforce unfair trade agreements
and is going to stand up to other
countries and the last point i'll make
because we started on energy you know
when i talked about the automakers they
are obviously getting hammered right now
they were already having a tough time
because of high gas prices and now with
the financial crisis car dealerships are
closing and people can't get car loans
that's why i think it's important for us
to get loan guarantees to the automakers
but we do have to hold them responsible
as well to start producing the highly
fuel-efficient cars of the future and
detroit had dragged its feet too long in
terms of getting that done it's going to
be one of my highest priorities because
transportation accounts for about 30
percent of our total energy consumption
if we can get that right then we can
move in a direction not only of energy
independence but we can create five
million new jobs all across america
including in the heartland where we can
retool some of these plants to make
these highly fuel-efficient cars and
also to make wind turbines and solar
panels the kinds of clean energy
approaches that should be the driver of
our economy for the next for the next
century well let me just say that that
this is he does sin obama doesn't want a
free trade agreement with our best ally
in the region but wants to sit down
across the table without precondition to
with hugo chavez the guy who has been
helping fart the terrorist organization
free trade between ourselves in colombia
i just recited to you the benefits of
concluding that agreement a billion
dollars of american dollars that could
have gone to creating jobs and
businesses in the united states opening
up those markets so i don't think
there's any doubt that senator obama
wants to restrict trade and he wants to
raise taxes and the last president
united states that tried that was
herbert hoover and we went from a deep
recession into a depression we're not
going to follow that path while i'm when
i'm president united stall right let's
go to a new topic
health care given the current economic
situation would either of you now favor
controlling health care costs over
expanding health care coverage the
question is first senator obama we've
got to do both and that's exactly what
my plan does look as i travel around the
country this is the issue that will
break your heart over and over again i
just yesterday i was in toledo shaking
some hands in the line two women both of
them probably in their mid to late 50s
had just been laid off of their plant
neither of them have health insurance
and they were desperate for some way of
getting coverage because understandably
they're worried that if they get sick
they could go bankrupt so here's what my
plan does if you have health insurance
then you don't have to do anything if
you've got health insurance through your
employer you can keep your health
keep your choice of doctor keep your
plan the only thing we're going to try
to do is lower costs so that those cost
savings are passed on to you and we
estimate we can cut the average family's
premium by about 2,500 per year if you
don't have health insurance then what
we're going to do is to provide you the
option of buying into the same kind of
federal pool that both senator mccain
and i enjoy as federal employees which
will give you high quality care choice
of doctors at lower costs because so
many people are part of this insured
group we're going to make sure that
insurance companies can't discriminate
on the basis of pre-existing conditions
we'll negotiate with the drug companies
for the cheapest available price on
drugs we are going to invest in
information technology to eliminate
bureaucracy and make the system more
efficient and we are going to make
sure that we manage chronic illnesses
like diabetes and heart disease that
cost a huge amount but could be
prevented we've got to put more money
into preventive care that this will cost
some money on the front end but over the
this is the only way that not only are
we going to make families healthy but
it's also how we're going to save the
federal budget because we can't afford
these escalating alright senator mccain
well it is a terribly painful situation
for americans they're seeing their
premiums or co-pays go up 47 million
americans or without health insurance in
america today and it really is the cost
the escalating costs of health care that
are inflicting such pain on working
families and people across this country
and i am convinced we need to do a lot
of things we need to put health care
records online the va does that that'll
that'll reduce costs we need to have
more community health centers we need to
have walk-in clinics the rise of obesity
amongst young americans is one of the
most alarming statistics that there is
we should have physical fitness programs
and nutrition programs in schools every
parent should know what's going on there
we we need to have when you have
employers reward employees who join
health clubs and practice wellness and
fitness but i want to give every
american family a 5,000 refundable tax
credit take it and get anywhere in
america the health care that you wish
now my old buddy joe joe the plumbers
out there a joe sent obama's plan if
you're a small business and you're able
be and you're the guy that sells to you
will not have as capital gains tax
increase which senator obama wants if
you're out there my friend and you've
got employees and you got kids if you
don't get adopted the health care plan
that senator obama mandates he's going
to find you now senator obama i'd like
to still like to know what that fines
going to be and i don't think that joe
right now wants to pay a fine when he is
seeing such difficult times in america's
economy yeah i said obama wants to set
up health care bureaucracies take over
the health care plan of america through
as he said is object is a
single payer system if you like that
bill you love canada in england so that
pointing objective it is not and and i
don't you sorry don't i just use you i
just described what my plan is and i'm
happy to talk to you joe to if you're
out there
here's your fine 0 you won't pay me on
because 0 because i as i said in our
last debate and and i'll repeat john i
exempt small businesses from the
requirement for large businesses that
can afford to provide health care to
their employees but are not doing it i
exempt small businesses from having to
pay into a kitty but large businesses
they can't afford it we've got a choice
either they provide health insurance to
their employees or somebody has to right
now what happens is those employees get
dumped into either the medicaid system
which taxpayers pick up or they're going
to the emergency room for uncompensated
care which everybody picks up in their
premiums the average family is paying an
additional nine hundred dollars a year
in higher premiums because of the
uninsured so here's what we do we exempt
small businesses in fact what joe if you
want to do the right thing with your
employees and you want to provide them
health insurance will give you a 50
percent credit so that you will actually
be able to afford it if you don't have
health insurance or you want to buy into
a group plan you will be able to buy
into the plan that i just described now
what we haven't talked about is senator
mccain's plan he says he's going to give
you all a 5,000 tax credit that sounds
pretty good and you can go out and buy
your own insurance here's the problem
that for about 20 million people you may
find yourself no longer having
employer-based health insurance this is
because younger people might be able to
get health insurance for 5,000 young and
healthy folks older folks less healthy
folks what's going to end up happening
is that you're going to be the only ones
left in your employer based system your
employers won't be able to afford it and
once you're out on your own with this
5,000 credit senator mccain for the
first time is going to be taxing
the health care benefits that you have
from your employer and and this is your
plan john for the first time in history
you will be taxing people's health care
benefits by the way the average policy
costs about twelve thousand dollars so
if you got five thousand and it's going
to cost you at twelve thousand that's a
loss for you last point about senator
mccain's plan is that insurers right now
the main restrictions on what they do is
primarily state law and under senator
mccain's plan and those rules would be
stripped away and you would start seeing
a lot more insurance companies
cherry-picking and excluding people from
coverage that i think is a mistake and
you know i think that this is a
fundamental difference in our campaign
and how we would approach health care
what about that hey joe you're rich
because what joe wanted to do was buy
the business that he's been working for
ten twelve hours a day seven days a week
and you said that you wanted to spread
the wealth but in other words take joe's
money and then you decide what to do
with it now joe you're rich
congratulations and you will then fall
into the category well you'll have to
pay a fine if you don't provide health
insurance that senator obama mandates
not the kind that you think is best for
your family your children your employees
but the kind that he mandates for you
that's big government at its best now 95
percent of the people in america will
receive more money under my plan because
they will receive not only their present
benefits which may be taxed which will
be taxed but then you add five thousand
dollars on to it except for those people
that have the gold-plated cadillac
insurance policies that have to do with
cosmetic surgery and and transplants and
all of those kinds of things and the
good thing about this is they'll be able
to go across america the average cost of
a health care insurance plan in america
today is fifty eight hundred dollars i'm
going to give them five thousand dollars
to take with them wherever they want to
go and this will give them affordability
this will
give them availability this will give
them a chance to choose their own
futures not have senator obama and
government decide that for them this
really gets down to the fundamental
difference in our philosophies if you
notice that in all of his proposals
senator government wants senator obama
wants government to do the job
senator obama wants government to that
you do the job i want joe you to do the
job i want to leave money in your pocket
i want you be you to be able to choose a
health care for you and your family
that's what i'm all about and we've had
too much government and too much
spending and the government is the size
of government has grown by 40 in the
last eight years we can't afford that
in the next eight years and senator
obama's with this democrats in charge of
congress things have gotten worse if you
notice they've been in charge the last
two years
shortened response very briefly you all
just heard my plan if you've got an
employer-based health care plan you keep
it now under senator mccain's plan there
is a strong risk that people would lose
their employer-based health care that's
the choice you'll have is having your
employer no longer provide you health
care and don't take my word for it the
us chamber of commerce which generally
doesn't support a lot of democrats said
that this plan could lead to the
unraveling of the employer-based health
care system all i want to do if you've
already got health care is lower your
costs that includes you each all right
let's let's stop there and go to another
question and this one goes to senator
mccain senator mccain you believe roe v
wade should be overturned senator obama
you believe it shouldn't could either of
you ever nominate someone to the supreme
court who disagrees with you on this
issue senator mccain i would never and
have never in all the years i've been
there imposed a litmus test on any
nominee to the court that's not
appropriate to do you know it's a bad
way if i thought again i thought it was
a bad decision i think there was a lot
of decisions that were bad i think that
the decision should rest in the hands of
the states
i'm a federalist and i believe strongly
that we should
have nominees to the united states
supreme court based on their
qualifications rather than any litmus
test now let me say that there was a
time a few years ago when the united
states senate was about to blow up
republicans wanted to have just a
majority vote to confirm a judge and the
democrats were blocking in an
unprecedented fashion we got together
seven republicans seven democrats you
were offered a chance to join you chose
not to because you were afraid of the
appointment of quote conservative judges
jeff i voted for justice breyer in
justice ginsburg
not because i agreed with their ideology
but because i thought they were
qualified in the judge and that
elections have consequences when
presidents are nominated this is a very
important issue we're talking about
senator obama voted against justice
breyer and justice roberts on the
grounds that they didn't meet his
ideological standards that's not the way
we should judge these nominees elections
have consequences they should be judged
on their qualifications and so that's
what i will do i will find the best
people in the world in in the united
states of america who have a history of
strict adherence the constitution but
not if it was exciting from the bench
even someone who had a history of being
for abortion rights you would consider
legal i would consider anyone in their
qualifications i do not believe that
someone was who has supported roe v wade
that would be part of those
qualifications but i certainly would not
impose any litmus test well i i think
it's true that we shouldn't apply a
strict litmus test and the most
important thing in any judge is their
capacity to provide fairness and justice
to the american people and it is true
that this is going to be i think one of
the most consequential decisions of the
next president it is very likely that
one of us will be making at least one
and probably more than one appointments
and roe versus wade probably hangs in
the balance now i would not
provide a litmus test but i am somebody
who believes that roe versus wade was
rightly decided i think that abortion is
a very difficult issue and it is a moral
issue and one that i think good people
on both sides can disagree on but what
ultimately i believe is that women in
consultation with their families their
doctors their religious advisers are in
a best position to make this decision
and i think that the constitution has a
right to privacy in it that shouldn't be
subject to state referendum in the end
anymore then our first amendment rights
are subject to state referendum anymore
then you know many of the other rights
that we have should be subject to you
know popular vote so this is going to be
an important issue i will look for those
judges who have an outstanding judicial
record who have the intellect and who
hopefully have a sense of what real word
world folks are going through i'll just
give you one quick example senator
mccain and i disagreed recently when the
supreme court made it more difficult for
a woman named lilly ledbetter to press
her claim for pay discrimination for
years she had been getting paid less
than a man had been paid for doing the
exact same job and when she brought a
suit saying equal pay for equal work the
judges said well you know it's taken you
too long to bring this lawsuit even
though she didn't know about it until
fairly recently we tried to overturn it
in the senate i supported that effort to
provide better guidance to the courts
john mccain opposed it i think that it's
important for judges to understand that
if a woman is out there trying to raise
a family
trying to support her family and is
being treated unfairly then that the
court has to stand up if nobody else
will and that's the kind of judge that i
want time subject obviously that law
waived this statute of limitations which
you could have gone back 20 or 30 years
it was a trial lawyers dream let me talk
to you about an important aspect of
this issue we have to change the culture
of america those of us who are proudly
pro-life understand that and it's got to
be courage and compassion that we show
to a young woman who's facing this
terribly difficult decision
senator obama is a member of the
illinois state senate voted in the
judiciary committee against a law that
would provide immediate medical
attention to a child born as a failed
abortion he voted against that and then
on the floor of the state senate as he
did a hundred and thirty times as a
state senator a voted president then
there was another bill before the senate
judiciary committee in the state of
illinois not that long ago where he
voted against a ban on partial-birth
abortion one of the late term abortion a
really one of the bad procedures
terrible and then on the floor of the
illinois state senate he voted present i
don't know how you vote present on some
of that i don't know how you align
yourself with the extreme aspect of the
pro-abortion movement in america and
that's his record and that's a matter of
his record and he'll say it has
something to do with roe v wade about
the illinois state senate there was
clear-cut votes that senator obama voted
i think in direct contradiction to the
feelings and views of mainstream america
well on yeah let me respond to this if
it sounds incredible that i would vote
to withhold life-saving treatment from
an infant that's because it's not true
the here are the facts there was a bill
that was put forward before the illinois
senate that said you have to provide
life savings treatment and that would
have helped to undermine roe versus wade
the fact is that there was already a law
on the books in illinois that required
providing life-saving treatment which is
why not only myself but pro-choice
republicans and democrats voted against
it and the illinois medical society the
organization of doctors in illinois
voted against it their hippocratic oath
would have required them to provide care
and those already a law in the
with respect to partial-birth abortion i
am completely supportive of a ban on
late term abortions partial birth or
otherwise as long as there's a exception
for the mother's health in life and this
did not contain that exception and i
attempted as many have in the past of
including that so that it is
constitutional and that was rejected and
that's why i voted president because i'm
willing to support a ban on late term
abortions as long as we have that
exception last point i want to make on
the the issue of abortion this is an
issue that look it divides us and in
some ways it may be difficult to
reconcile the two views but there surely
is some common ground when both those
who believe in a choice and those who
are opposed to abortion can come
together and say we should try to
prevent unintended pregnancies by
providing appropriate education to our
youth communicating that sexuality is
sacred and that they should not be
engaged in in cavalier activity and
providing options for adoption and
helping single mothers if they want to
choose to keep the baby those are all
things that we put in the democratic
platform for the first time this year
and i think that's where we can find
some common ground because nobody's
pro-abortion i think it's always a
tragic situation we should try to reduce
these circumcenter that came just show
against by just again example of the
eloquence of senator obama he's health
for the mother you know that's been
stretched by the pro-abortion movement
in america to mean almost anything
that's that's the extreme probe portion
position quote health but look cindy and
i are adoptive parents we know what a
treasure and joy it is to have an
adopted child in our lives we'll do
everything we can to approve adoption in
this country but that does not mean that
we will cease to protect the rights of
the unborn of course we have to come
together of course we have to work
together and of course it's vital that
we do so and help these young women who
are facing such a difficult decision but
the compassion that will help them with
adoptive services but the courage to
bring that child into this world will
help take care of it let's stop there
because i want to get in a question on
education and i'm afraid this is gonna
have to be our last question gentlemen
the question is this the u.s spends
more per capita than any other country
on education yet by every international
measurement in math and science
competence from kindergarten through the
12th grade we trail most of the
countries of the world the implications
of this are clearly obvious some even
say it poses a threat to our national
security do you feel that way and what
do you intend to do about it
the question to send for obama first
this probably has more to do with our
economic future than anything and that
means it also has a national security
implication because there's never been a
nation on earth that saw its economy
decline and continued to maintain its
primacy as a military power so we've got
to get our education system right now
typically what's happened is that
there's been a debate between more money
or reform and i think we need both in
some cases we are gonna have to invest
early childhood education which closes
the achievement gap so that every child
is prepared for school every dollar we
invest in that we end up getting huge
benefits with improved reading scores
reduced dropout rates reduced
delinquency rates i think it's going to
be critically important for us to
recruit a generation of new teachers an
army of new teachers especially in math
and science give them higher pay give
them more professional development and
support in exchange for higher standards
and accountability and i think it's
important for us to make college
affordable right now i meet young people
all across the country who either have
decided not to go to college or if
they're going to college they are taken
on 20 30 50 60,000 worth of debt and
it's very difficult for them to go into
some fields like basic research and
science for example thinking to
themselves that they're gonna have a
mortgage before they even buy a house
and that's why
i've proposed a 4,000 tuition credit
every student every year in exchange for
some form of community service whether
it's military service whether it's peace
corps whether it's working in a
community if we do those things then i
believe that we can create a better
school system but there's one last
ingredient that i just want to mention
and that's parents we can't do it just
in the schools parents are going to have
to show more responsibility they've got
to turn off the tv set put away the
video games and finally start instilling
that thirst for knowledge that our
students need senator mccain
well a it's a civil rights issue of the
21st century there's no doubt that we
have achieved equal access to schools in
america after a long and difficult and
terrible struggle but what is the
advantage in a low-income area of
sending a child to a failed school and
that being your only choice so choice
and competition among schools is one of
the key elements that's already been
proven in places like new orleans and
new york city and other places where we
have charter schools where we take good
teachers and we reward them and promote
them and we find bad teachers another
line of work
and we have to be able to prove parents
the same choice frankly that senator
obama and mrs obama had in cindy and i
had to send our kids to the school their
kids to the school of their choice
charter schools aren't the only answer
but they're providing competition they
are providing the kind of competitions
that have upgraded both schools types of
schools now throwing money at the
problem is not the answer you will find
that some of the worst school systems in
america get the most money per student
so i believe that we need to reward
these good teachers we need to encourage
programs such as teach for america and
troops to teachers where people after
having served in the military can go
right to teaching and not have to take
these examinations which or have the
certification that some are in required
in some state look we must improve
education in the
country as far as college education is
concerned we need to make those student
warrants of loans available we need to
give them a repayment schedule that they
can meet we need to have full student
loan program for in-state tuition and we
certainly need to adjust the student
loan eligibility to inflation do you
think the federal government should play
a larger role in the schools well and i
mean more federal money well we have a
tradition of local control of the
schools and that's a tradition that has
served us well but i do think that it is
important for the federal government to
step up and help local school districts
do some of the things they need to do we
tried to do this under president bush he
put forward no child left behind
unfortunately they they left the money
behind for no child left behind and
local school districts end up having
more of a burden a bunch of unfunded
mandates the same kind of thing that
happened with special education where we
did the right thing by saying every
school should provide education to kids
with special needs but we never followed
through on the promise of funding and
that left local school districts very
so what i want to do is focus on early
childhood education providing teachers
higher salaries in exchange for more
support senator mccain and i actually
agree on two things that he just
mentioned charter schools i doubled the
number of charter schools in illinois
despite some reservations from teachers
unions i think it is important for us to
foster competition inside the public
schools and we also agree on the need
for making sure that if we have bad
teachers that they are swiftly after
given an opportunity to prove themselves
that they can't hack it then we need to
move on because our kids have to have
their best future where we disagree is
on the idea that we can somehow give our
vouchers give vouchers as a way of
securing the the problems in our
education system
and i also have to disagree on senator
mccain's record when it comes to college
accessibility and affordability every
recently his key economic adviser was
asked about why he didn't see
have some specific programs to help
young people go to college and the
response was well we can't give money to
every interest group that comes along i
don't think america's youth or interest
groups i think they're our future
and this is an example of where we are
going to have to prioritize we can't say
we're going to do things and then not
explain in concrete terms how we're
gonna pay for it and if we're gonna do
some of the things you mentioned like
lowering loan rates or what-have-you
somebody's got to pay for it it's not
going to happen on its own what about
that center well sure i'm sure you aware
senator obama of the program in the
washington dc school system where
vouchers are provided and there's a
certain number i think it's a thousand
in some and some 9,000 parents asked to
be eligible for that because they wanted
to have the same choice that you and i
and and cindy and your wife have had and
that is because they wanted to choose
the school that they thought was best
for their children and we all know the
state of the washington dc school system
that was vouchers that was vouchers
senator obama and i'm and i and i'm
frankly surprised you didn't pay more
attention to that example now as far as
as the no child left behind is concerned
it was a great first beginning in my
view it had its flaws it had its
problems the first time we had looked at
the issue of education america from a
nationwide perspective and we need to
fix a lot of the problems we need to sit
down and reauthorize it but again
spending more money isn't always the
i think the head start program is a
great program with a lot of people
including me said look it's not doing
what it should do by the third grade
many times children who are in head
start program aren't any better off than
the others let's reform it let's reform
it and fund it that was of course out of
bounds by by the democrats we need to
reform these programs we need to have
transparency we need to have rewards
it's a system that cries out for
accountability and transparency and the
adequate funding and i just said to you
earlier town hall meeting after town
hall meeting parents come with kids
children precious children who have
sarah palin knows about that better than
most and will find and will spend the
money research to find the cause of
autism and will care for these young
children and all americans will open
their wallets and their hearts to do so
but to have a situation as you mentioned
in our earlier comments that the most
expensive education in the world is in
the united states of america also means
that it cries out for reform as well and
i will support those reforms and i will
fund the ones that are reform but i'm
not going to continue to throw money at
a problem and i've got to tell you that
vouchers where they are requested and
where they are agreed to are a good and
workable system and it's been proven
i'll just make a quick comment about
vouchers in dc the senator mccain is
absolutely right that the dc school
system is in terrible shape and it has
been for a very long time and we've got
a wonderful new superintendent there
who's working very hard with the young
mayor there to try to loosen
commissioners who initiate who initially
sports charters she said i think yeah
but but here's the thing is that even if
senator mccain were to say that vouchers
were the way to go i disagree with him
on this because the data doesn't show
that it actually solves the problem the
centerpiece of senator mccain's
education policy is to increase the
voucher program in dc by 2,000 slots
that leaves all of you who live in the
other 50 states without an education
reform policy from senator mccain so if
we are going to be serious about this
issue we've got to have a president who
is going to tackle it head-on and that's
what i intend to do as president
alright cuz there's not enough vouchers
therefore we shouldn't do it even though
it's working
i got gentlemen we have come to the
close before i asked both of you for
your closing statements tonight i'd like
to invite our viewers and listeners to
go to my debates dot org where you will
find this evenings debates and the three
that preceded tonight
debate now for the final statements by a
coin toss
senator mccain goes first well thank you
again bob thanks to hofstra and it's
great to be with you again i think we've
had a very healthy discussion my friend
since i said in my opening remarks these
are very difficult times and challenges
for america and they were graphically
just demonstrated again today america
needs a new direction we cannot be
satisfied with what we've been doing for
the last eight years i have a record of
reform and taking on my party the other
party the special interests whether it
be on hmo patients bill of rights are
trying to clean up the campaign finance
system in in this country or whether it
be establishment of a 9/11 commission i
have a long record of it and i've been a
careful steward
of your tax dollars we have to make
health care aboard affordable and
available we have to make a quality
education there for all of our citizens
not just a privileged view we have to
stop the spending we have to stop the
spending which is mortgaged your
children's futures all of these things
and all the promises and commitments
that senator obama and i made you to
make made to you tonight will base will
be based on whether you can trust us or
not to be careful stewards of your tax
dollar to make sure america is safe and
secure and prosperous and make sure we
reform the institutions of government
that's why i've asked you to not only to
examine my record but my proposals for
the future of this country i've spent my
entire life in the service of this
nation and putting my country first
there's a long line of mccain's that has
served our country for a long time in
war and in peace it's been the great
honor of my life and i've been proud to
serve and i hope you'll give me an
opportunity to serve again i'd be
honored and humbled senator
well i want to thank senator mccain and
bob for moderating i think we all know
america is going through tough times
right now the policies of the last eight
years and and washington's unwillingness
to tackle the tough problems for decades
has left us in the worst economic crisis
since the great depression and that's
why the biggest risk we could take right
now is to adopt the same failed policies
and the same failed politics that we've
seen over the last eight years and
somehow expect a different result we
need fundamental change in this country
and that's what i'd like to bring you
know over the last 20 months you've
invited me into your homes you've shared
your stories with me and you've
confirmed once again the fundamental
decency and generosity of the american
people and that's why i'm sure that our
brighter days are still ahead but we're
gonna have to invest in the american
people again in tax cuts for the middle
class in health care for all americans
and college for every young person who
wants to go in businesses that can
create the new energy economy of the
future in policies that will lift wages
and will grow our middle class these are
the policies i've fought for my entire
career and these are the policies i want
to bring to the white house but it's not
going to be easy it's not going to be
quick it's going to be requiring all of
us democrats republicans independents to
come together and to renew a spirit of
sacrifice and service and responsibility
i'm absolutely convinced we can do it i
would ask for your vote and i promise
you that if you give me the
extraordinary honor of serving as your
president i will work every single day
tirelessly on your behalf and on the
behalf of the future of our children
thank you very much senator obama
senator mccain
thank you very much this concludes the
final debate i'm bob schieffer of cbs
news and i will leave you tonight with
what my mother always said go vote now
it'll make you feel big and strong good
good job